---
pubDate: Jul 08 2019
title: "Declaration of Digital Independence"
tags:
  - Web
audience: "everyone, especially those fed up with the privacy-infringing practices of big tech and centralized social networks"
---

There is little doubt that we, as individuals, need to do much more to stand up
to the incessant infringement of our right to privacy at the hands of large tech
corporations and VC-backed startups alike. Their unabating encroachment on our
daily lives can only be stopped if we pour our hearts and souls into conceiving,
building, and growing decentralized alternatives using open standards and
protocols.

In an attempt to rally netizens against corporate surveillance, Larry Sanger,
the co-founder of Wikipedia, penned the manifesto below, taken verbatim from
[his blog](https://larrysanger.org/2019/06/declaration-of-digital-independence/) and [online petition](https://www.change.org/p/social-media-executives-decentralize-social-media-a-declaration-of-digital-independence),
and republished here under a [CC BY-NC-SA 3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/) license:

---

Humanity has been contemptuously used by vast digital empires. Thus it is now
necessary to replace these empires with decentralized networks on f independent
individuals, as in the first decades of the Internet. As our participation has
been voluntary, no one doubts our right to take this step. But if we are to
persuade as many people as possible to join together and make reformed networks
possible, we should declare our reasons for wanting to replace the old.

We declare that we have unalienable digital rights, rights that define how
information that we individually own may or may not be treated by others, and
that among these rights are free speech, privacy, and security. Since the
proprietary, centralized architecture of the Internet at present has induced
most of us to abandon these rights, however reluctantly or cynically, we ought
to demand a new system that respects them properly. The difficulty and
divisiveness of wholesale reform means that this task is not to be undertaken
lightly. For years we have approved of and even celebrated enterprise as it has
profited from our communication and labor without compensation to us. But it has
become abundantly clear more recently that a callous, secretive, controlling,
and exploitative animus guides the centralized networks of the Internet and the
corporations behind them.

The long train of abuses we have suffered makes it our right, even our duty, to
replace the old networks. To show what train of abuses we have suffered at the
hands of these giant corporations, let these facts be submitted to a candid
world.

They have practiced in-house moderation in keeping with their executives’
notions of what will maximize profit, rather than allowing moderation to be
performed more democratically and by random members of the community.

They have banned, shadow-banned, throttled, and demonetized both users and
content based on political considerations, exercising their enormous corporate
power to influence elections globally.

They have adopted algorithms for user feeds that highlight the most
controversial content, making civic discussion more emotional and irrational and
making it possible for foreign powers to exercise an unmerited influence on
elections globally.

They have required agreement to terms of service that are impossible for
ordinary users to understand, and which are objectionably vague in ways that
permit them to legally defend their exploitative practices.

They have marketed private data to advertisers in ways that no one would
specifically assent to.

They have failed to provide clear ways to opt out of such marketing schemes.

They have subjected users to such terms and surveillance even when users pay
them for products and services.

They have data-mined user content and behavior in sophisticated and disturbing
ways, learning sometimes more about their users than their users know about
themselves; they have profited from this hidden but personal information.

They have avoided using strong, end-to-end encryption when users have a right to
expect total privacy, in order to retain access to user data. They have amassed
stunning quantities of user data while failing to follow sound information
security practices, such as encryption; they have inadvertently or deliberately
opened that data to both illegal attacks and government surveillance.

They have unfairly blocked accounts, posts, and means of funding on political or
religious grounds, preferring the loyalty of some users over others.

They have sometimes been too ready to cooperate with despotic governments that
both control information and surveil their people.

They have failed to provide adequate and desirable options that users may use to
guide their own experience of their services, preferring to manipulate users for
profit.

They have failed to provide users adequate tools for searching their own
content, forcing users rather to employ interfaces insultingly inadequate for
the purpose.

They have exploited users and volunteers who freely contribute data to their
sites, by making such data available to others only via paid application program
interfaces and privacy-violating terms of service, failing to make such
freely-contributed data free and open source, and disallowing users to anonymize
their data and opt out easily.

They have failed to provide adequate tools, and sometimes any tools, to export
user data in a common data standard.

They have created artificial silos for their own profit; they have failed to
provide means to incorporate similar content, served from elsewhere, as part of
their interface, forcing users to stay within their networks and cutting them
off from family, friends, and associates who use other networks.

They have profited from the content and activity of users, often without sharing
any of these profits with the users.

They have treated users arrogantly as a fungible resource to be exploited and
controlled rather than being treated respectfully, as free, independent, and
diverse partners.

We have begged and pleaded, complained, and resorted to the law. The executives
of the corporations must be familiar with these common complaints; but they
acknowledge them publicly only rarely and grudgingly. The ill treatment
continues, showing that most of such executives are not fit stewards of the
public trust.

The most reliable guarantee of our privacy, security, and free speech is not in
the form of any enterprise, organization, or government, but instead in the free
agreement among free individuals to use common standards and protocols. The vast
power wielded by social networks of the early 21st century, putting our digital
rights in serious jeopardy, demonstrates that we must engineer new—but
old-fashioned—decentralized networks that make such clearly dangerous
concentrations of power impossible. Therefore, we declare our support of the
following principles.

## Principles of Decentralized Social Networks

1. We free individuals should be able to publish our data freely, without having
   to answer to any corporation.
2. We declare that we legally own our own data; we possess both legal and moral
   rights to control our own data.
3. Posts that appear on social networks should be able to be served, like email
   and blogs, from many independent services that we individually control,
   rather than from databases that corporations exclusively control or from any
   central repository.
4. Just as no one has the right to eavesdrop on private conversations in homes
   without extraordinarily good reasons, so also the privacy rights of users
   must be preserved against criminal, corporate, and governmental monitoring;
   therefore, for private content, the protocols must support strong, end-to-end
   encryption and other good privacy practices.
5. As is the case with the Internet domain name system, lists of available user
   feeds should be restricted by technical standards and protocols only, never
   according to user identity or content.
6. Social media applications should make available data input by the user, at
   the user’s sole discretion, to be distributed by all other publishers
   according to common, global standards and protocols, just as are email and
   blogs, with no publisher being privileged by the network above another.
   Applications with idiosyncratic standards violate their users’ digital
   rights.
7. Accordingly, social media applications should aggregate posts from multiple,
   independent data sources as determined by the user, and in an order
   determined by the user’s preferences.
8. No corporation, or small group of corporations, should control the standards
   and protocols of decentralized networks, nor should there be a single brand,
   owner, proprietary software, or Internet location associated with them, as
   that would constitute centralization.
9. Users should expect to be able to participate in the new networks, and to
   enjoy the rights above enumerated, without special technical skills. They
   should have very easy-to-use control over privacy, both fine- and
   coarse-grained, with the most private messages encrypted automatically, and
   using tools for controlling feeds and search results that are easy for
   non-technical people to use.

We hold that to embrace these principles is to return to the sounder and better
practices of the earlier Internet and which were, after all, the foundation for
the brilliant rise of the Internet. Anyone who opposes these principles opposes
the Internet itself. Thus we pledge to code, design, and participate in newer
and better networks that follow these principles, and to eschew the older,
controlling, and soon to be outmoded networks.

*We, therefore, the undersigned people of the Internet*, do solemnly publish and
declare that we will do all we can to create decentralized social networks; that
as many of us as possible should distribute, discuss, and sign their names to
this document; that we endorse the preceding statement of principles of
decentralization; that we will judge social media companies by these principles;
that we will demonstrate our solidarity to the cause by abandoning abusive
networks if necessary; and that we, both users and developers, will advance the
cause of a more decentralized Internet.

- Reda Lemeden
