# Shinwa: The missing sun
#website/neosamurai

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 15, 2006

Amaterasu gave birth to five kami, whereas Susanowo gave birth to three Megami. After amaterasu  [declared the division of the newly-born deities](https://web.archive.org/web/20061107172015/http://neosamurai.blogspot.com/2006/10/shinwa-susanowos-visit.html) , Susanowo replied: “Owing to the sincerity of my intentions I have, in begetting children, gotten delicate females. Judging from this, I have undoubtedly gained the victory!”.
Growing arrogant, Susanowo started behaving rudely. He ruined the divisions between ricefields that Amaterasu set up to separate them. He then filled the ditches and ended up dropping excrements in the New Palace where Amaterasu stored the crops. Amaterasu thought that her brother had no bad intentions, and he did so just out of whim. However, Susanowo didn’t seem to hold back and kept doing evil deeds. Amaterasu couldn’t bear him anymore when he flayed a piebald poney of heaven and flung it in the weaving hall where she was weaving Kami garments, through a hole in the ceiling.

She retired immediately and confined herself in the cave called *Amano-iwato* 天岩戸, “Heavenly-Rock-Dwelling”, then blocked the entrance with a huge boulder. Being the goddess of the sun, her seclusion caused the universe, Heavens and Earth , to dwell in uninterrupted darkness.

Thus, The eight hundred (eighty in the Nihonshoki) Kami grew seriously worried about this matter, and assembled in the bank of the Tranquil River of Heaven, *Ameno-yasukaha,* and discussed a way to supplicate Amaterasu out.It is then when *Omoi-kane* (no-kami) 思兼神, the Thought-Includer hatched plan to draw her out, and thus asked the other Kami to help him perform a ceremony. He first gathered the singing birds of darkness and made them sing together. He then collected rocks from the heveanly river and iron from the heavenly mines, and called forth the smith *Amatsumara*, then charged *Ishikoridome* to make the eight-feet mirror 八咫鏡（*Yata-no-kagami*）, and *Tamanoya* to make 500 Yasaka beads. He also asked *Amenokoyane*and*Futotama* to bring a shoulder blade of a stag from the Mount *Kagu* of heaven, as well as a 500 branch  [Sakaki ](https://web.archive.org/web/20061107172015/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sakaki) tree. He placed therefore the Sakaki tree in front of Amano-iwato and hung the Yasaka jewels as well as the other offerings on its branches. He then hung the eight-feet mirror in the middle branches of the sasaki, and asked Amenokoyane to sing some liturgies, and *Amenota-jikarawo*to hide beside the entrance of the cave. At that time, *Ameno-uzume,*the Heavenly-Alarmingdeity, adorned herself with various plants from Kagu, and made of them a sash, head dress and a posy around her hands, then started dancing on a sounding wooden container, pulling her nipples and pushing down her skirt until some of her private parts showed.

The deities laughters reached Amaterasu ears on the other side of the rock. She grew curious and decided to peek at the outside. “Methought that owing to my retirement the Plain of Heaven would be dark, and likewise the Earth would all be dark: how then is it that Ameno-uzume makes merry, and that likewise the eight hundred myriad Deities all laugh?” Asked from the inside. “We rejoice and are glad because there is a Deity more illustrious than Thou.” Replied Ameno-uzume. She moved the rock blocking the entrance to take a glimpse at the outside. *Amenokoyane*and*Futotama*directed the mirror towards her, and thus she was dazzled with her own “dawn” rays of light. *Amenota-jikarawo*chose the right time to pull her out of the cave*,*”Thou must not go back further in than this!” he adressed Amaterasu. So she came out and brought back light to the world.

The eight hundred deities decided to punish Susanowo and expel him. They simposed a fine on him, shaved his beard and pulled out his fingers and nails.

Susanowo seeked food from *Ohogetsu-hime* (no-kami)大宜都比売神, “Princess-of-Great-Food”, and she didn’t turn him down, inspite his evil deeds. She made him all sorts of dishes from the dainty things she took out from her nose and mouth. However, Susanowo assumed that all she offered him were her bodily wastes, and thus killed her.
After her death, silkworms were born from her head, rice-seeds in her eyes, millet in her ears, small beans in her nose, barley in her private parts, andlarge beans in her bottom. Susanowo took them and use them as seeds.

POSTED BY KAISHIN AT  [12:43 PM](https://web.archive.org/web/20061107172015/http://neosamurai.blogspot.com/2006/10/shinwa-missing-sun.html) 