---
pubDate: Sep 29 2011
title: "My Quest for the Perfect Text Editor"
tags:
  - Programming
  - Opinion
  - macOS
---

I started my career making mediocre websites with clunky <abbr title="What You See Is What You Get">WYSIWYG</abbr> tools from
Macromedia and Adobe. Everything looked and felt horrible. But I didn't know any
better.

> "Ignorance is bliss." --- Thomas Gray

In 2007, I bought my first iMac and started using Textmate as my main text
editor. Before long, I was enjoying every line of code I wrote. A good user
interface goes a long way in making software delightful to use.

Textmate was simple by design. It didn't have auto-save, smart undo, or
autocomplete---features that have become standard in other editors at the time.
It was getting harder by the day to not jump ship. I started by taking Coda and
Espresso for a spin. I was fairly impressed with their obsession to make Web
design as seamless as possible. Inconveniently, their main selling point is also
their biggest snag: they suck as standalone text editors.

My quest for the perfect text editor had to continue on Google. The first result
page suggested BBedit, Vim, and Emacs, among other lesser-known alternatives. At
the time, Vim and Emacs were too keyboard-centric for my taste, not to mention
their unappealing user interfaces, or lack thereof.

Eventually, my next stop was the two-decades-old BBedit, which coincided with
the release of a big update for OS X Lion. Recommended by many pundits, I was
almost confident that BBedit would fit the bill. Alas, the intrusive toolbar,
the nebulous syntax highlighting, and the poor support for CSS preprocessors
left me disappointed.

The only options I was left with was to wade through an unhealthy number of
Textmate 2 wannabes. Some came out of the lot, such as Sublime Text, while many
others were too unstable for doing any serious work. What they all seemed to
have in common was a noticeable lack of third party extensions and community
support.

At the end of this fruitless search, I kept Sublime Text 2, BBedit, and Espresso
2 installed, and used them in rotation depending on the project and the mood.

*To be continued...*
